Robotics II
January 7, 2020
Exercise 1
Consider the robot in Fig. 1 with N = 3 joints, one prismatic and two revolute. Each link of the robot has
uniformly distributed mass, center of mass on its physical link axis, and a diagonal barycentric link inertia
matrix. We assume that friction at the joints can be neglected. The robot is commanded at the joint level
by a generalized vector of forces/torques τ ∈ R3 .
a) Derive the dynamic model of the robot in the Lagrangian form M (q)q̈ + c(q.q̇) + g(q) = τ .
b) Find a linear parametrization Y (q, q̇, q̈) a = τ of the robot dynamics in terms of a vector a ∈ Rp of
dynamic coefficients and of a 3 × p regressor matrix Y . Discuss the minimality of p.
c) Determine which of the 10N = 30 dynamic parameters of the links are irrelevant for the describing the
motion of the robot.
d) Given a desired smooth trajectory q d (t) ∈ C 2 in the joint space, design for this robot an adaptive control
law that globally asymptotically stabilizes the tracking error e(t) = q d (t) − q(t) to zero, without any
a priori knowledge of the robot dynamic parameters.

l2
q3

dc2
m1

q1

dc3

q2

m2,
I2

m3,
I3

g0
y0
x0
Figure 1: A PRR robot with coordinates q = (q1 q2 q3 )T and relevant kinematic/dynamic parameters.
Exercise 2
A number of questions and statements are reported on the Questionnaire Sheet. Fill in your answers
and/or comments on the same sheet, providing also a short motivation/explanation for each item. Add
your name on the sheet and return it.
[210 minutes, open books]

Robotics II - Questionnaire Sheet
January 7, 2020
Name:
Answer to the questions or comment the statements, providing also a short motivation/explanation for
each of the following 4 items.
1. Write down the calibration equation for a planar 2R robot in which the only inaccurate values are the
link lengths l1 and l2 . Describe briefly how to set up a kinematic calibration procedure in this caee.

2. At a given q ∈ RN , we have to choose the velocity command q̇ ∈ RN that minimizes the objective
function H = 12 q̇ T A−1 q̇, with A > 0, while satisfying the task J q̇ = ẋ ∈ RM , with M < N and
rank{J } = M . Two commands have been computed as

−1
q̇ 0 = A−1 J T JA−1 J T
ẋ

and



q̇ 00 = J # ẋ − I − J # J ∇q̇ H,

with ∇q̇ H = A−1 q̇.

Which command is better? Why?

3. Consider an assembly task, in which a peg having an equilateral triangle as section is to be inserted at
a slow but constant speed V in a similar hole with reduced clearance. Define a suitable task frame and
the natural and artificial constraints for this task.

4. For a 2-dof RP robot in the horizontal plane, write the explicit expression of an energy-based scalar
residual, able to detect collisions when all the robot joints are in motion. Determine also which type of
contact forces in the plane F c ∈ R2 (i.e., where they are applied on the robot, and in which direction)
cannot be detected by this method, even if the robot is not at rest.

