Robotics II
September 22, 2014
Exercise 1
The actuation device shown in Fig. 1 is a servomechanism with a DC motor coupled to a rotating
load through a flexible transmission.

䙵!

䙶!

䙷!

䙸!

䙹!

Figure 1: A 1-dof actuation device with flexible transmission
• Explain the role to each component numbered (from 1 to 5) in the figure.
• Using an energy (Lagrangian) approach, derive a dynamic model of the system that is appropriate for trajectory planning, motion control, and simulation. Assume that the flexible
transmission can be modeled as a visco-elastic element, i.e., it behaves as a damped spring of
constant stiffness. In addition, viscous friction is present on the motor and load sides of the
transmission. The DC motor is commanded in current. Write down the complete dynamic
equations and draw an associated block diagram for simulation purposes (in Simulink style).
• Neglect all dissipative effects in the following. Plan a smooth rest-to-rest trajectory that
rotates the load from an initial angle q0 to a final qf in given time T , without residual
vibrations.
• Determine next the input current profile that should command the motor so that the planned
trajectory is realized exactly when the system is initially undeformed and at rest.
Exercise 2
The Newton-Euler method is used for the dynamic modeling of serial robots. In inverse dynamics
problems, its most efficient implementation is a numerical algorithm (NE) containing a forward
recursive (FR) part, which computes from the base to the tip all relevant differential kinematic
terms associated to the links, and a backward recursive (BR) part, which computes from the
tip to the base the exchanged forces/torques between links. Suppose now that we compute the
(linear/angular) acceleration vector p̈ ∈ R6 of the end-effector by
p̈ = N EF R(q, q̇, q̈) = J (q)q̈ + J̇ (q)q̇,

(1)

where N EF R in eq. (1) denotes compactly the FR part only of the NE algorithm. How could the
N EF R algorithm be used to evaluate numerically and separately the Jacobian matrix J and the
product term J̇ q̇? With the same algorithm, can we also evaluate the matrix J̇ alone?
[150 minutes; open books]

